docs/modules/tools/pages/index.adoc, before:

= IATI Tools

Additional tools for IATI data.

This section contains a few additional tools to work with IATI data.
They are prototypes, used in workshops and for data migration.

== Docker setup

First, make sure your source directory is checked out for this branch.

Then, create a Docker container image as explained in the
xref:development:index.adoc#_setting_up_a_development_environment[]
section, specifically for this branch.

The last step in the process above will look like this:

  $ aida-s2i -d -t tools build

This should generate a separate image with version tag `tools`.

== Network diagrams

We use the https://www.yworks.com/products/yed[yEd graph editor]
to generate network diagrams of IATI data files.
This tool can be used for free,
and installed on a local machine.

`yEd` lets the user build hierarchical graphs.
This allows us to group IATI activities within IATI organisations.
The resulting diagram can be manually cleaned up,
and saved as PNG or SVG image.

In the SVG version, we add clickable links to activities and organisations.

* Activities try to open a local HTML page for the activity.
+
[NOTE]
====
Local pages for activities are not implemented in this version.

They could also link to a d-portal page,
although originally, we supported organisations to review their activity
before it was available on d-portal.
====

* Organisations link to the d-portal page for the organisation,
based on their identifier.

=== How to run

. Go into a workspace directory.

. Make sure there are one or more IATI files in the `src/` directory.
+
Typically, this will be an IATI file generated with the S2I conversion tool.

. Generate a network diagram:
+
  $ aida-s2i -t tools yed

. Start `yEd` and open the appropriate `*.graphml` file in the `output/` directory.
+
All information will be centered and overlapping in the image.
Through the `Layout` menu `Hierarchical`, or the key combination kbd:[Alt+Shift+H],
the graph can be rendered as either left-to-right, or as top-down overview.

Commit message:

feat: export IATI data into S2I templates
Add a command to put data in an IATI file into S2I spreadsheets.

docs/modules/tools/pages/index.adoc, after:

= IATI Tools

Additional tools for IATI data.

This section contains a few additional tools to work with IATI data.
They are prototypes, used in workshops and for data migration.

== Docker setup

First, make sure your source directory is checked out for this branch.

Then, create a Docker container image as explained in the
xref:development:index.adoc#_setting_up_a_development_environment[]
section, specifically for this branch.

The last step in the process above will look like this:

  $ aida-s2i -d -t tools build

This should generate a separate image with version tag `tools`.

== IATI to S2I

We can generate (most of) the spreadsheet template contents for an organisation
based on their existing IATI data.

[NOTE]
====
The ultimate goal is to provide full round-trip conversions
for both activities and organisations.

However, the current conversion from IATI data to our templates is not fully
up to date with the reverse conversion.
====

=== How to run

. Go into a workspace directory.

. Make sure there are one or more IATI files in the `src/` directory.
+
Typically, this will be an IATI file generated by for instance Aidstream.

. Generate Excel spreadsheets:
+
  $ aida-s2i -t tools iati-office

The resulting spreadsheets will be put into the `output/` directory.
The file names will be the base name of the source file,
followed by the expected template file name for a particular section.

== Network diagrams

We use the https://www.yworks.com/products/yed[yEd graph editor]
to generate network diagrams of IATI data files.
This tool can be used for free,
and installed on a local machine.

`yEd` lets the user build hierarchical graphs.
This allows us to group IATI activities within IATI organisations.
The resulting diagram can be manually cleaned up,
and saved as PNG or SVG image.

In the SVG version, we add clickable links to activities and organisations.

* Activities try to open a local HTML page for the activity.
+
[NOTE]
====
Local pages for activities are not implemented in this version.

They could also link to a d-portal page,
although originally, we supported organisations to review their activity
before it was available on d-portal.
====

* Organisations link to the d-portal page for the organisation,
based on their identifier.

=== How to run

. Go into a workspace directory.

. Make sure there are one or more IATI files in the `src/` directory.
+
Typically, this will be an IATI file generated with the S2I conversion tool.

. Generate a network diagram:
+
  $ aida-s2i -t tools yed

. Start `yEd` and open the appropriate `*.graphml` file in the `output/` directory.
+
All information will be centered and overlapping in the image.
Through the `Layout` menu `Hierarchical`, or the key combination kbd:[Alt+Shift+H],
the graph can be rendered as either left-to-right, or as top-down overview.
